external: add topologyconstraintpool support for rbd storageclass (#13821)
rook/rook: Documentation/CRDs/Cluster/external-cluster/topology-for-external-mode.md

# Topology-Based Provisioning

## Scenario
Applications like Kafka will have a deployment with multiple running instances. Each service instance will create a new claim and is expected to be located in a different zone. Since the application has its own redundant instances, there is no requirement for redundancy at the data layer. A storage class is created that will provision storage from replica 1 Ceph pools that are located in each of the separate zones.

## Configuration Flags

Add the required flags to the script: `create-external-cluster-resources.py`:

> `--topology-pools`: (optional) Comma-separated list of topology-constrained rbd pools

Reviewer: Add these flags to a bullet list
```suggestion
- `--topology-pools`: (optional) Comma-separated list of topology-constrained rbd pools
```

`--topology-failure-domain-label`: (optional) K8s cluster failure domain label (example: zone, rack, or host) for the topology-pools that match the ceph domain

`--topology-failure-domain-values`: (optional) Comma-separated list of the k8s cluster failure domain values corresponding to each of the pools in the `topology-pools` list

The import script will then create a new storage class named `ceph-rbd-topology`.

## Example Configuration

### Ceph cluster

Determine the names of the zones (or other failure domains) in the Ceph CRUSH map where each of the pools will have corresponding CRUSH rules.

Create a zone-specific CRUSH rule for each of the pools. For example, this is a CRUSH rule for `zone-a`:

> $ ceph osd crush rule create-replicated <rule-name> <root> <failure-domain> <class>

Reviewer: The triple tick marks on line 27 should be moved up to line 25 to include this command in the block

Author: updated

# Topology-Based Provisioning

## Scenario
Applications like Kafka will have a deployment with multiple running instances. Each service instance will create a new claim and is expected to be located in a different zone. Since the application has its own redundant instances, there is no requirement for redundancy at the data layer. A storage class is created that will provision storage from replica 1 Ceph pools that are located in each of the separate zones.

## Configuration Flags

Add the required flags to the script: `create-external-cluster-resources.py`:
`--topology-pools`: (optional) Comma-separated list of topology-constrained rbd pools
`--topology-failure-domain-label`: (optional) K8s cluster failure domain label (example: zone, rack, or host) for the topology-pools that match the ceph domain
 `--topology-failure-domain-values`: (optional) Comma-separated list of the k8s cluster failure domain values corresponding to each of the pools in the `topology-pools` list

The import script will then create a new storage class named `ceph-rbd-topology`.

## Example Configuration

### Ceph cluster

Looking at the osd tree, before jumping to the steps

> ```

Reviewer: Just remove the crush map example. It doesn't show zones anyway, and everyone's CRUSH topology is different. Hopefully the suggested sentence above is sufficient to explain.

ID  CLASS  WEIGHT   TYPE NAME       STATUS  REWEIGHT  PRI-AFF
-1         2.00000  root default
-9         0.50000      host osd-0
 3    hdd  0.25000          osd.3       up   1.00000  1.00000
```

> Create the zone-specific CRUSH rule, example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a zone-specific CRUSH rule for each of the pools. For example, this is a CRUSH rule for `zone-a`:
```

> crush_rule 5

Reviewer: Don't just show the crush rule, but how about the command to create it?
```suggestion
$ <Insert Ceph command to create the example crush rule>
```

```
 {
            "rule_id": 5,
            "rule_name": "rule_host-zone-a-hdd",
            "type": 1,
            "steps": [
                {
                    "op": "take",
                    "item": -10,
                    "item_name": "zone-a~hdd"
                },
                {
                    "op": "choose_firstn",
                    "num": 0,
                    "type": "osd"
                },
                {
                    "op": "emit"
                }
            ]
}
```

> Create a replica-1 pool in each failure domain (assume zone for this example). Each pool must be created with a CRUSH rule to limit the pool to OSDs in a specific zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create replica-1 pools based on each of the CRUSH rules from the previous step. Each pool must be created with a CRUSH rule to limit the pool to OSDs in a specific zone.
```

!!! note

>    Disable the ceph warning for replica-1 pools: `ceph config set global  mon_allow_pool_size_one true`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Disable the ceph warning for replica-1 pools: `ceph config set global mon_allow_pool_size_one true`
```

> Set the flags value based on the pools and failure domains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the flags of the external cluster configuration script based on the pools and failure domains.
```

--topology-pools=pool-a,pool-b,pool-c
--topology-failure-domain-label=zone

> --topology-failure-domain-values=zone-a,zone-b,zone-c

Reviewer: These zones aren't determined until after the analyze the nodes in the next paragraph below, right? Seems like these options should just be moved below with the `create-external-cluster-resources.py` command.

Current machine:
```
$ kubectl get nodes --show-labels
```

> Then run the python script:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then run the script to generate the settings which will be imported to the Rook cluster:
```

```

Output:
```
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_FSID=8f01d842-d4b2-11ee-b43c-0050568fb522
....
....
....
export TOPOLOGY_POOLS=pool-a,pool-b,pool-c
export TOPOLOGY_FAILURE_DOMAIN_LABEL=zone
export TOPOLOGY_FAILURE_DOMAIN_VALUES=zone-a,zone-b,zone-c
```

### Kubernetes Cluster

Check the external cluster is created and connected as per the installation steps.
Review the new storage class:
```
$ kubectl get sc ceph-rbd-topology -o yaml
allowVolumeExpansion: true
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2024-03-07T12:10:19Z"
  name: ceph-rbd-topology
  resourceVersion: "82502"
  uid: 68448a14-3a78-42c5-ac29-261b6c3404af
parameters:
  ...
  ...
  pool: replicapool
  topologyConstrainedPools: |
    [
     {"poolName":"pool-a",
      "domainSegments":[
        {"domainLabel":"zone","value":"zone-a"}]},
     {"poolName":"pool-b",
      "domainSegments":[
        {"domainLabel":"zone","value":"zone-b"}]},
     {"poolName":"pool-c",
      "domainSegments":[
        {"domainLabel":"zone","value":"zone-c"}]},
    ]
provisioner: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com
reclaimPolicy: Delete
volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
```

> Create a PVC using this storageclass

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create a Topology-Based PVC
```

> Try storing the data on the pvc mount path of the pod, and watch the osds and see how the data is spread only among the crush buckets where pool has the access to store data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topology-based storage class is ready to be consumed! Create a PVC from the `ceph-rbd-topology` storage class above, and watch the OSD usage to see how the data is spread only among the topology-based CRUSH buckets.
```

# Topology-Based Provisioning

## Scenario
Applications like Kafka will have a deployment with multiple running instances. Each service instance will create a new claim and is expected to be located in a different zone. Since the application has its own redundant instances, there is no requirement for redundancy at the data layer. A storage class is created that will provision storage from replica 1 Ceph pools that are located in each of the separate zones.

## Technical implementation details

Add the required flags to the script: `create-external-cluster-resources.py`:
`--topology-pools`: (optional) Comma-separated list of topology-constrained rbd pools
`--topology-failure-domain-label`: (optional) K8s cluster failure domain label (example: zone, rack, or host) for the topology-pools that match the ceph domain
 `--topology-failure-domain-values`: (optional) Comma-separated list of the k8s cluster failure domain values corresponding to each of the pools in the `topology-pools` list

The import script will then create a new storage class named `ceph-rbd-topology`.

## Example Configuration

### Ceph cluster

> Looking at the osd tree, before jumping to the steps

Author: we need to make crush rule of the pool depending on the osd tree

> Looking at the osd tree, before jumping to the steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Determine the names of the zones (or other failure domains) in the Ceph CRUSH map where each of the pools will have corresponding CRUSH rules.
```

```
ID  CLASS  WEIGHT   TYPE NAME       STATUS  REWEIGHT  PRI-AFF
-1         2.00000  root default
-9         0.50000      host osd-0
 3    hdd  0.25000          osd.3       up   1.00000  1.00000
```

Create m replica-n pools with specific crush rule, verify replica-n pools by running: `ceph osd pool ls detail`

!!! note
   Require to run `ceph config set global  mon_allow_pool_size_one true` for creating replica-1 pools

> Then decide what will be the flags value based on the crush rules and kubernetes cluster nodes.

Author: this line is much more simpler

--topology-pools -> Would be the 3 replica-1 pools, i.e pool-a,pool-b,pool-c
--topology-failure-domain-label -> kubernetes cluster nodes label depending on the need.
--topology-failure-domain-values -> kubernetes cluster nodes

> Current machine:

Author: to update the `topology-failure-domain-values` 

as rhcs cluster and k8s cluster would have different formats

> Current machine:

Reviewer: Don't just answer my question in the comment, please also explain to the user, something like this:
```suggestion
Determine the zones in the K8s cluster that correspond to each of the pools in the Ceph pool. The K8s nodes require labels as defined with the [OSD Topology labels](../ceph-cluster-crd.md#osd-topology). Some environments already have nodes labeled in zones. Set the topology labels on the nodes if not already present.
```

> # Topology provisioning for external mode

Reviewer: It's under the external cluster folder, so we can shorten the title
```suggestion
# Topology-Based Provisioning
```

> 

Reviewer: For this whole doc, think about what the user needs to do for accomplishing the configuration of a topology-based storage class. Only include that in the doc. Remove all extra output that distracts from these steps. Try to make this doc concise, and not show all possible output.

Author: okay

## Background

> For Block storage (RWO), Enable Topology awareness for PV provisioning. Preferably, picking the replica 1 Storage Class for this AZ or creating a volume in a relevant AZ using a single storage class. It will help in providing Isolation to application/pods in AZ

Reviewer: I still don't understand this paragraph. Can you try to clarify it, and also add a sentence why it is related to external clusters?

Author: removed

## Scenario
Applications like Kafka will have a deployment with multiple running instances. Each service instance will create a new claim and is expected to be located in a different zone. Since the application has its own redundant instances, there is no requirement for redundancy at the data layer. A storage class is created that will provision storage from replica 1 Ceph pools that are located in each of the separate zones.

## Technical implementation details

> Add --topology-pools, --topology-failure-domain-label, --topology-failure-domain-values to the script: `create-external-cluster-resources.py` where,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the required flags to the script: `create-external-cluster-resources.py`:
```

> `--topology-pools`: (optional) comma-separated list of topology-constrained rbd pools

Reviewer: These flags are duplicated from the other doc. Same updates needed here.

`--topology-failure-domain-label`: (optional) k8s cluster failure domain label (example: zone,rack,host,etc) for the topology-pools that are matching the ceph domain
 `--topology-failure-domain-values`: (optional) comma-separated list of the k8s cluster failure domain values corresponding to each of the pools in the topology-pools list

The import script will then create a new storage class named `ceph-rbd-topology`.

## Example Configuration

### Ceph cluster

Looking at the osd tree, before jumping to the steps

> ```

Reviewer: No need to include a full CRUSH map. Ceph users will understand without seeing a full example.

ID  CLASS  WEIGHT   TYPE NAME       STATUS  REWEIGHT  PRI-AFF
-1         2.00000  root default
-9         0.50000      host osd-0
 3    hdd  0.25000          osd.3       up   1.00000  1.00000
 7    hdd  0.25000          osd.7       up   1.00000  1.00000
-7         0.50000      host osd-1
 1    hdd  0.25000          osd.1       up   1.00000  1.00000
 6    hdd  0.25000          osd.6       up   1.00000  1.00000
-3         0.50000      host osd-2
 2    hdd  0.25000          osd.2       up   1.00000  1.00000
 5    hdd  0.25000          osd.5       up   1.00000  1.00000
-5         0.50000      host osd-3
 0    hdd  0.25000          osd.0       up   1.00000  1.00000
 4    hdd  0.25000          osd.4       up   1.00000  1.00000
```

Create m replica-n pools, in the example create 3 replica-1 pools:

```

> pool 10 'ab' replicated size 1 min_size 1 crush_rule 5 object_hash rjenkins pg_num 32 pgp_num 32 autoscale_mode on last_change 334 lfor 0/0/254 flags hashpspool,selfmanaged_snaps stripe_width 0 application rbd read_balance_score 1.06

Reviewer: IMO no need to show this verbose pool output. You could suggest they run `ceph osd pool ls detail` to verify the pools are replica 1, but no need for all this output.

pool 11 'cd' replicated size 1 min_size 1 crush_rule 6 object_hash rjenkins pg_num 32 pgp_num 32 autoscale_mode on last_change 335 lfor 0/0/256 flags hashpspool,selfmanaged_snaps stripe_width 0 application rbd read_balance_score 1.19
pool 12 'ef' replicated size 1 min_size 1 crush_rule 7 object_hash rjenkins pg_num 32 pgp_num 32 autoscale_mode on last_change 336 lfor 0/0/256 flags hashpspool,selfmanaged_snaps stripe_width 0 application rbd read_balance_score 1.06
```

!!! note
   Require to run `ceph config set global  mon_allow_pool_size_one true` for creating replica-1 pools

Review the specific crush rules:

> crush_rule 5

Reviewer: Are they supposed to create this crush rule?

Author: yes

```

>  {

Reviewer: Let's use a crush rule based on a zone instead of host

            "rule_id": 5,
            "rule_name": "rule_host-osd0-hdd",
            "type": 1,
            "steps": [
                {
                    "op": "take",
                    "item": -10,
                    "item_name": "osd-0~hdd"
                },
                {
                    "op": "choose_firstn",
                    "num": 0,
                    "type": "osd"
                },
                {
                    "op": "emit"
                }
            ]
}
```

Once the pools are ready with specific crush rules.

Decide what will be the flags value based on the crush rules and kubernetes cluster nodes.

--topology-pools -> Would be the 3 replica-1 pools, i.e ab,cd,ef
--topology-failure-domain-label -> kubernetes cluster nodes label depending on the need.
--topology-failure-domain-values -> kubernetes cluster nodes

Current machine:
```

> $ kubectl get nodes --show-labels

Reviewer: No need to show the list of nodes. Maybe just tell them a command to query the nodes in a zone: `kubectl get node -l topology.kubernetes.io/zone=zone-a`

NAME           STATUS   ROLES           AGE    VERSION   LABELS
minikube       Ready    control-plane   3d2h   v1.27.4   beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,kubernetes.io/hostname=minikube,kubernetes.io/os=linux,minikube.k8s.io/commit=fd7ecd9c4599bef9f04c0986c4a0187f98a4396e,minikube.k8s.io/name=minikube,minikube.k8s.io/primary=true,minikube.k8s.io/updated_at=2024_03_04T16_18_42_0700,minikube.k8s.io/version=v1.31.2,node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane=,node.kubernetes.io/exclude-from-external-load-balancers=
minikube-m02   Ready    <none>          28h    v1.27.4   beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,kubernetes.io/hostname=minikube-m02,kubernetes.io/os=linux
minikube-m03   Ready    <none>          28h    v1.27.4   beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,kubernetes.io/hostname=minikube-m03,kubernetes.io/os=linux
```

Then run the python script:
```

>  python3 create-external-cluster-resources.py --rbd-data-pool-name nitin --topology-pools ab,cd,ef --topology-failure-domain-label hostname --topology-failure-domain-values minikube,minikube-m02,minikube-m03

Reviewer: `nitin` is your test pool name?

Author: changed to replicapool

# Topology provisioning for external mode

## Background

> For Block storage (RWO), Enable Topology awareness for PV provisioning. Preferably, picking the replica 1 Storage Class for this AZ or creating a volume in a relevant AZ using a single storage class. It will help in providing Isolation to application/pods in AZ

Author: it talks about block storage and in general terms, i would vote to keep it, second scenario is mostly an example

## Usage

> Applications like Kafka will have a deployment with number of instances. When using more than one instances, each service instances will create a new claim and will be located in a different zone. The configuration will include PVC and storage class. We will need to use replica 1 storage class and we will have PVC equivalent to instances, each PV is expected in a different zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications like Kafka will have a deployment with multiple running instances. Each service instance will create a new claim and is expected to be located in a different zone. Since the application has its own redundant instances, there is no requirement for redundancy at the data layer. A storage class is created that will provision storage from replica 1 Ceph pools that are located in each of the separate zones.
```

## Technical implementation details

> Add --topology-pools, --topology-failure-domain-label, --topology-failure-domain-values  to the python script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add --topology-pools, --topology-failure-domain-label, --topology-failure-domain-values  to the script: `create-external-cluster-resources.py`
```

where,
`--topology-pools`: (optional) comma-separated list of topology-constrained rbd pools
`--topology-failure-domain-label`: (optional) k8s cluster failure domain label (example: zone,rack,host,etc) for the topology-pools that are matching the ceph domain
 `--topology-failure-domain-values`: (optional) comma-separated list of the k8s cluster failure domain values corresponding to each of the pools in the topology-pools list

> And import script will create a new storage class `ceph-rbd-topology` if all these flags are passed during the export of ceph cluster data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The import script will then create a new storage class named `ceph-rbd-topology`.
```

> ## Example Steps Configuration and flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example Configuration
```

> ### RHCS cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ceph cluster
```

> Looking at the osd tree, before jumping to the steps

Reviewer: Please review the example for the following details:
- Don't use "minikube" for the host name. You need at least three unique host and zone names for the example.
- Don't include all the verbose ceph output unless it's really necessary to show a point. The ceph admins will understand the instructions if you just show the commands. Then we don't have to maintain the output in our docs.
- Use example pool names like `pool-a`, `pool-b`. The double letter pool names are confusing.
- Use example zone names like `zone-a`, `zone-b`, etc. It's nice for the example if the zone name corresponds to the pool names.

Author: >Don't include all the verbose ceph output unless it's really necessary to show a point. The ceph admins will understand the instructions if you just show the commands. Then we don't have to maintain the output in our docs.

Mostly kept there as to see the hierarchy and understand how the flow works for a particular hierarchy,  I can mention this is a specific cluster details it can very from user to user

Author: > Don't use "minikube" for the host name. You need at least three unique host and zone names for the example.

I think we use minikube in other docs too it would be fine, otherwise my whole initial flow would be not of use where I list nodes and all

>Use example zone names like zone-a, zone-b, etc. It's nice for the example if the zone name corresponds to the pool names.

We dont discuss about zones in this flow, its in the host

Reviewer: Users who are using topology in their configuration will likely have zones, and not just hosts. I still suggest to use zones so the scenario makes more sense. You can modify the example output to have made-up zone names, then use pool names that are similar to the zone names. For example, `pool-a` belongs to `zone-a`.

Author: done

--topology-failure-domain-values -> kubernetes cluster nodes

Current machine:
```
$ kubectl get nodes --show-labels
NAME           STATUS   ROLES           AGE    VERSION   LABELS
minikube       Ready    control-plane   3d2h   v1.27.4   beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,kubernetes.io/hostname=minikube,kubernetes.io/os=linux,minikube.k8s.io/commit=fd7ecd9c4599bef9f04c0986c4a0187f98a4396e,minikube.k8s.io/name=minikube,minikube.k8s.io/primary=true,minikube.k8s.io/updated_at=2024_03_04T16_18_42_0700,minikube.k8s.io/version=v1.31.2,node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane=,node.kubernetes.io/exclude-from-external-load-balancers=
minikube-m02   Ready    <none>          28h    v1.27.4   beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,kubernetes.io/hostname=minikube-m02,kubernetes.io/os=linux
minikube-m03   Ready    <none>          28h    v1.27.4   beta.kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,beta.kubernetes.io/os=linux,kubernetes.io/arch=amd64,kubernetes.io/hostname=minikube-m03,kubernetes.io/os=linux
```

Then run the python script:
```

>  python3 a.py --rbd-data-pool-name nitin --topology-pools ab,cd,ef --topology-failure-domain-label hostname --topology-failure-domain-values minikube,minikube-m02,minikube-m03

Reviewer: a.py? Where is that script?

Author: updated, i used short from for testing thanks fro catching

export ROOK_EXTERNAL_USERNAME=client.healthchecker
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_CEPH_MON_DATA=osd-1=10.1.112.32:6789
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_USER_SECRET=AQDyAd9lfiDOLxAAcvvOwLW6HESKqzjHUIrhwg==
export ROOK_EXTERNAL_DASHBOARD_LINK=https://10.1.112.46:8443/
export CSI_RBD_NODE_SECRET=AQDyAd9lNTDAMBAA3iXWRho6V0YYdP1Xgm++tQ==
export CSI_RBD_NODE_SECRET_NAME=csi-rbd-node
export CSI_RBD_PROVISIONER_SECRET=AQDyAd9l+z+vMRAAoTJpMnNqhrAvA6x4Xw038g==
export CSI_RBD_PROVISIONER_SECRET_NAME=csi-rbd-provisioner
export CEPHFS_POOL_NAME=cephfs.fsvol001.data
export CEPHFS_METADATA_POOL_NAME=cephfs.fsvol001.meta
export CEPHFS_FS_NAME=fsvol001
export CSI_CEPHFS_NODE_SECRET=AQDyAd9l6MG5MhAAf+hno2rMc3S8de0AoVsiGQ==
export CSI_CEPHFS_PROVISIONER_SECRET=AQDyAd9lK1ykMxAA3iWWyYmm4omJTXDzLegtDw==
export CSI_CEPHFS_NODE_SECRET_NAME=csi-cephfs-node
export CSI_CEPHFS_PROVISIONER_SECRET_NAME=csi-cephfs-provisioner
export MONITORING_ENDPOINT=10.1.112.46
export MONITORING_ENDPOINT_PORT=9283
export RBD_POOL_NAME=nitin
export TOPOLOGY_POOLS=ab,cd,ef
export TOPOLOGY_FAILURE_DOMAIN_LABEL=hostname
export TOPOLOGY_FAILURE_DOMAIN_VALUES=minikube,minikube-m02,minikube-m03
export RGW_POOL_PREFIX=default
```

> Kubernetes Cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Kubernetes Cluster
```

  imageFormat: "2"
  pool: nitin
  topologyConstrainedPools: |
    [
     {"poolName":"ab",
      "domainSegments":[
        {"domainLabel":"hostname","value":"minikube"}]},
     {"poolName":"cd",
      "domainSegments":[
        {"domainLabel":"hostname","value":"minikube-m02"}]},
     {"poolName":"ef",
      "domainSegments":[
        {"domainLabel":"hostname","value":"minikube-m03"}]},
    ]
provisioner: rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com
reclaimPolicy: Delete
volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
```

Create a PVC using this storageclass
```
[rider@localhost rbd]$ kubectl describe  pvc
Name:          rbd-pvc
Namespace:     default
StorageClass:  ceph-rbd-topology
Status:        Pending
Volume:
Labels:        <none>
Annotations:   <none>
Finalizers:    [kubernetes.io/pvc-protection]
Capacity:
Access Modes:
VolumeMode:    Filesystem
Used By:       <none>
Events:
  Type    Reason                Age              From                         Message
  ----    ------                ----             ----                         -------
  Normal  WaitForFirstConsumer  4s (x2 over 8s)  persistentvolume-controller  waiting for first consumer to be created before binding
```

> After you create pod, the above pvc will bound to the specific topology where pod is created and will use the storage from specific pool that matches the failure domain(pool crush rule).

Reviewer: In the docs we try not to use "you"
```suggestion
After the pod is created, the above pvc will bound to the specific topology where pod is created and will use the storage from specific pool that matches the failure domain (pool crush rule).
```
